# Histology-image-analysis

Histology image-based diagnostic tool for classification of the various pre-malignant oral disease condition
Histology-based evaluation of various pre-malignant conditions and their progression to oral cancer is a gold standard in cancer diagnosis. However, this traditional approach is met with the challenging task due to (1) difficulty to distinguish overlapping tissue architectural changes, (2) time-consuming process to assess the stage, type, and subtype of cancer, (3) hard-to-differentiate complex sub-cellular changes, and (4) differences in diagnostic opinion and diagnostic variation. Automated image-based machine learning (ML) tools have shown great promise to overcome these challenges. The complex microscopic images carry in-depth information that needs to be addressed but gets skipped by the human eye. Oral disease conditions like Oral submucous fibrosis (OSMF), oral epithelial dysplasia (OED), oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) exhibit subtle changes in the epithelial and underlying subepithelial regions when observed under the microscope. These structural changes may reveal important information about the early diagnostics, disease progression, and prognosis. However, the currently available manual, as well as semi-automated methods or diagnostic tools, are inexplicit to collect the desired information and lack the precision to provide reliable information. In our research study, we will develop an ML-based model that will be trained to recognize and differentiate between various oral pre-malignant disease conditions. The images will be classified based on epithelial architecture, nuclear morphology, nuclei-cytoplasmic ratio, nuclear size, shape, and distribution. These features will thus contribute as the basis for the image classification, and development of the ML-based automated tool, which is otherwise difficult to discern by traditional methods like the one used by histopathologists.
For model development, two different approaches will be applied and compared for their specificity and objectivity.
    • ML-based model: All the parameters quantified from the images will be now taken as input by the different machine learning algorithms such as random forest classifier, support vector machines, and k-nearest neighbor to train the model on the python platform. Each algorithm will be trained to predict the class to which the tissue slide image belongs. The parameters will be optimized as per the accuracy is shown by the different machine learning models. Based on the correlation and probability analysis, the model will be trained in such a way that it can classify the input image as of normal or OSMF or OED or OSCC patient. These machine learning algorithms will be tested with the selected parameters and the one showing the high accuracy rates (>95%) will be selected for further validation.
    • CNN based model: Another model will be built on the convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture for which the processed images of normal, OSMF, OED and OSCC will be directly given as input to train the software. However, the microscopic image size will be compressed to less than 500*500 image size approximately. The CNN will consist of the input layer, convolutional layer, max-pooling layer, and fully connected layers. Multiple CNN will be trained to obtain the network that would give the maximum accuracy (>95%). A rectified linear unit (ReLU) activation function of choice would be applied after each layer in convolutional and fully connected layers to introduce non-linearity. To prevent the network from overfitting, a simple dropout function may be applied because the number of parameters gets occupied in the fully connected layer. The features extracted from the above layers would be used to generate a feature map which will be utilized to classify the images into normal, OSMF, OED, and OSCC. Hence, the final layer would contain a softmax function classifier that looks at the output of the previous layer and determines which feature correlate to a particular class. The model will be validated with the manually annotated data by the experienced pathologist and validation accuracies will be reported.
Both ML and CNN models will be compared and the one showing the higher sensitivity and specificity will be selected as the final model.
Significance of the study:
The purpose of the proposed computer-aided study is to establish an easy to handle tool that can assist oral histopathologists and physicians in making a precise diagnosis of oral pre-malignant diseases. The novelty of the proposed study is that even a general dentist can access and provide hands-on diagnosis and prognosis to the concerned patients. In addition, the developed tool will also be able to make the prognosis of the OSCC in the patients diagnosed with OSMF and OED.
